19 weeks pregnant guide - Best Start in Life - NHS Skip to main content Week 13 Week 14 Week 15 Week 16 Week 17 Week 18 Week 19 Week 20 Week 21 Week 22 Week 23 Week 24 Week 25 Week 26 Week 27 Week 19 You might think that bubbling feeling in your tummy is wind, but it could be your baby moving. You'll soon be able to recognise their movements. What's happening in my body? It's great for you and baby to stay active, but some exercises, such as running, could become uncomfortable. This is because the hormone "relaxin" loosens up your ligaments, leaving your back, knees and ankles without their usual support. Tips for better sleep Not getting enough sleep in pregnancy can be very frustrating. You could try these tips for better sleep: practise beditation – a mixture of meditation and gentle stretches designed to help you drift off sleep on your side use pillows to support your bump and any aching muscles try sleeping with a pillow between your knees The NHS website has remedies for sleep problems during pregnancy . 2nd trimester pregnancy symptoms (at 19 weeks) Are you worried about anything? Trust your instincts and share any worries with your health professional. Watch a video from Tommy's about how to speak up in pregnancy. Your signs of pregnancy this week could include: tiredness and sleeping problems stretch marks ( see week 17 for information about stretch marks ) swollen and bleeding gums ( week 13 has information about gum health during pregnancy ) pains on the side of your pregnant belly, caused by your expanding womb (known as "round ligament pains") headaches (read about headaches in pregnancy on NHS.uk ) nosebleeds pelvic pain (read about coping with pelvic pain in pregnancy on NHS.uk ) bloating and constipation (read about bloating on week 10's page ) indigestion and heartburn ( week 25 talks about digestive problems ) sore breasts leg cramps feeling hot dizziness swollen hands and feet urine infections vaginal infections ( see week 15 for vaginal health ) darkened skin on your face or brown patches - this is known as chloasma or the "mask of pregnancy" greasier, spotty skin thicker and shinier hair You may also experience symptoms from earlier weeks, such as: morning sickness (read about dealing with morning sickness on week 6's page ) weird pregnancy cravings (read about pregnancy cravings on week 5's page ) a heightened sense of smell mood swings ( week 8's page has information on mood swings ) a white milky pregnancy discharge from your vagina and light spotting (seek medical advice for any bleeding) What does my baby look like? Your baby, or foetus, is around 15.3cm long from head to bottom. That's approximately the size of a beef tomato. Their adult teeth are starting to grow, and they are lining up behind the first set. Your baby's putting on weight, getting ready for the birth in about 21 weeks' time. Your baby is about the size of a beef tomato Action stations You might still be thinking about where to give birth – there's plenty of time to decide. Read about your options on where to give birth on the NHS website . It's important to find somewhere that meets your needs and makes you feel supported. Think about telling your work You do not have to tell your employer for several more weeks, but as soon as you do, you will have maternity rights and can attend antenatal appointments during paid work time. You can also ask for a risk assessment of your work place to ensure that you're working in a safe environment. Start doing pelvic floor exercises It's a good time to tone up your pelvic floor muscles. Gentle exercises can help to prevent leakage when you laugh, sneeze or cough. Get the muscles going by pretending that you're having a pee and then stopping midflow. Visit Tommy's for more information on pelvic floor exercises. Antenatal classes Ask your midwife or doctor about online antenatal classes – they may be able to recommend one. The charity Tommy's has lots of useful information on antenatal classes and preparing you for birth . Even if you've had children before, antenatal classes are still worth going to as you can meet other parents-to-be. The NCT offers online antenatal classes with small groups of people that live locally to you. Smoking, drinking and caffeine in pregnancy Do your best to stop smoking and give up alcohol , and go easy on the tea, coffee and anything else with caffeine. Ask your midwife or GP for support. Vitamins in pregnancy To keep bones and muscles healthy, we need vitamin D. From late March/early April to the end of September, most people make enough vitamin D from sunlight on their skin. However, between October and early March, you should consider taking a daily vitamin D supplement because we cannot make enough from sunlight. Some people should take a vitamin D supplement all year round, find out if this applies to you on the NHS website. You just need 10 micrograms (it's the same for grown-ups and kids). Check if you're entitled to free vitamins . Exercising in pregnancy It's recommended that you do 150 minutes of exercise a week while pregnant . You could start off with just 10 minutes of daily exercise – perhaps take a brisk walk outside. Listen to your body and do what feels right for you. Healthy eating There's no need to eat for 2. You do not need any extra calories until the third trimester, which starts in week 28. You just need to eat a healthy balanced diet, with a variety of different foods every day, including plenty of fruit and veg. Have a look at our guide to healthy eating in pregnancy . You may be able to get free milk, fruit and veg through the Healthy Start scheme . More in week-by-week Week 20 You're now halfway through your pregnancy! Week 21 Week 18 More in week-by-week guide to pregnancy Sign up for emails Our emails include NHS trusted advice and support, tailored to your stage of pregnancy or baby's age. Sign up for emails Is this page useful? Yes No Thank you for your feedback!