39 weeks pregnant guide - Best Start in Life - NHS Skip to main content NHS Best Start in Life home NHS logo Search the NHS website Search NHS logo Pregnancy Baby Toddler Childcare and education support (external) Home Pregnancy Week-by-week guide to pregnancy Back to Week-by-week guide to pregnancy Week 28 Week 29 Week 30 Week 31 Week 32 Week 33 Week 34 Week 35 Week 36 Week 37 Week 38 Week 39 Week 40 Week 41 Week 39 Pregnancy normally lasts around 40 weeks and most women will go into labour a week either side of their due date. That means any day now! On this page What's happening in my body? 9 signs you should not ignore 7 things you might not expect when your baby's born 3rd trimester pregnancy symptoms (at 39 weeks) What does my baby look like? Action stations This week's treat More in week-by-week Sign up for emails What's happening in my body? You might be getting a lot more discharge in your pants than usual. This should be thin, white and not smell of very much. If you spot a slimy blob of mucus that's yellow or bloody, then that's called a "show". This sticky stuff used to plug up your cervix and when it comes out, it can be one of the first signs that your baby's on the way. However, don't grab your hospital bag just yet, as you could still have days to wait. You may be getting back pain as your baby moves down your pelvis and starts pressing against your spine. You'll probably feel increased pressure at the bottom of your bump now. You could also be getting sudden bursts of energy and urgently want to fold baby clothes or tidy drawers that you haven't opened for years. That's your nesting instinct kicking in. RSV vaccination Have you had the RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) vaccine? It's usually offered at around week 28 but can be given later if needed, right up until you go into labour. Having the vaccination can lower your baby's risk of a severe lung infection called bronchiolitis , which can make it difficult for your baby to breathe and feed. If you've not had it yet, speak to your midwife or a GP. Read more about the RSV vaccine on NHS.UK. 9 signs you should not ignore If you get any of the following signs, then treat it as an emergency and call your midwife, doctor or NHS 111: bleeding from your vagina brown or pink discharge severe itching, particularly at night a terrible headache that will not go away vision problems (blurring, light sensitivity, seeing spots or flashing lights) pain just below the ribs extreme swelling of the feet, ankles, hands and face persistent stomach pains a high temperature (above 37.5 degrees C) with no other flu or cold symptoms 7 things you might not expect when your baby is born Babies do not usually come out wailing like they do in the films. It could take a few seconds before they cry or splutter to clear their airways. Your baby will be checked out within a minute of being born. You might not be aware of it, as you'll be meeting your baby at the same time. Your baby will be rated on the Apgar scale for their heart rate, breathing, muscle tone, responsiveness and skin colour. This will be rechecked at 5 minutes. Your baby's hands and feet might be blue, as their circulation is still a work in progress. The rest of their skin will be dark red or purple, then turn a brighter red when they take their first breath. It can take weeks before their true skin colour is revealed. If your baby's rubbed vigorously with a towel, this doesn't mean that there's a problem, it's probably just to help the blood flow. It can take a few minutes before your baby is breathing regularly. They tend to do lots of fast breaths, then lots of slow breaths. The gap between breaths can be as long as 5 seconds. They're just learning to breathe, so this is normal. Boys can be born with large testicles – that's just temporary, caused by hormones and water retention. They will settle down and look more in proportion soon. It's not always love at first sight. Give yourself time to bond with your baby and ask for help if you need it. It can take 6 weeks for your womb to go back to the size it was. Breastfeeding can speed this process up, as it makes your womb contract. Find out more on the NHS website about your body after the birth and what happens when your baby is born . 3rd trimester pregnancy symptoms (at 39 weeks) You could be getting a lot of practice contractions, but if they start getting painful, then they could be the real deal. Read 5 signs that baby's on the way on week 37's page. Phone your hospital or midwife when your contractions last for at least 60 seconds and come every 5 minutes – or call any time if you're worried that something is wrong, such as if your baby stops moving or if you're losing blood. Your signs of pregnancy could also include: painless contractions around your bump, known as Braxton Hicks contractions sleeping problems ( week 19 has information on feeling tired ) stretch marks ( week 17 has information on stretch marks ) swollen and bleeding gums ( week 13 has information on gum health during pregnancy ) pains on the side of your baby bump, caused by your expanding womb ("round ligament pains") piles ( week 22 has information on piles ) headaches (read about headaches in pregnancy on NHS.uk ) backache indigestion and heartburn ( week 25 has information on digestive problems ) bloating and constipation ( week 10 has information on bloating ) leg cramps ( week 20 has information on how to deal with cramp ) feeling hot dizziness swollen hands and feet urine infections vaginal infections ( week 15 has information on vaginal health ) darkened skin on your face or brown patches – this is known as chloasma or the "mask of pregnancy" greasier, spotty skin thicker and shinier hair You may also experience symptoms from earlier weeks, such as: mood swings ( week 8 has information on mood swings ) morning sickness ( week 6 has information on dealing with morning sickness ) weird pregnancy cravings ( week 5 has information on pregnancy cravings ) a heightened sense of smell sore or leaky breasts ( week 14 has information on breast pain ) – a white milky pregnancy discharge from your vagina and light spotting (seek medical advice for any bleeding) Read Tommy's guide to common pregnancy symptoms . What does my baby look like? Your baby, or foetus, is around 50.7cm long from head to heel. That's approximately the size of a watermelon. A few weeks ago, your baby's skin was almost transparent but now they're growing a tougher new layer that looks more solid. This is better at protecting their internal organs and helping with temperature control. The skin will be coated in a white, waxy substance called "vernix", which means varnish in Latin. This creamy layer helps to protect their skin and eases your baby down the birth canal. Your baby might be covered in it when they are born, or it could be mostly gone. Your baby is about the size of a small watermelon. Action stations Be on full alert in case your waters break, as this could happen at any time. Don't expect a tidal wave, as it could be just a trickle. If you think it's started, then call your midwife or doctor and ask for advice. You might have just wet yourself, but if your waters have broken, then your labour may need to be induced , as your baby will be at a greater risk of infection. This week you could also... Enjoy your maternity leave You're probably on leave now. Find out how much maternity leave and pay you're entitled to. Start doing pelvic floor exercises It's a good time to tone up your pelvic floor muscles. Gentle exercises can help to prevent leakage when you laugh, sneeze or cough. Get the muscles going by pretending that you're having a pee and then stopping midflow. Visit Tommy's for more information on pelvic floor exercises. Antenatal classes Ask your midwife or doctor about online antenatal classes – they may be able to recommend one. The charity Tommy's has lots of useful information on antenatal classes and preparing you for birth . Ask your partner if they would like to take part in the antenatal classes. Even if you've had children before, antenatal classes are still worth going to as you can meet other parents-to-be. The NCT offers online antenatal classes with small groups of people that live locally to you. Smoking, drinking and caffeine in pregnancy Do your best to stop smoking and give up alcohol , and go easy on the tea, coffee and anything else with caffeine. Ask your midwife or GP for support. Vitamins in pregnancy To keep bones and muscles healthy, we need vitamin D. From late March/early April to the end of September, most people make enough vitamin D from sunlight on their skin. However, between October and early March, you should consider taking a daily vitamin D supplement because we cannot make enough from sunlight. Some people should take a vitamin D supplement all year round, find out if this applies to you on the NHS website. You just need 10 micrograms daily (it's the same for grown-ups and kids). Check if you're entitled to free vitamins . Exercising in pregnancy It's recommended that you do 150 minutes of exercise a week while pregnant . You could start off with just 10 minutes of daily exercise – perhaps take a brisk walk outside. Listen to your body and do what feels right for you. Healthy eating There's no need to eat for 2. Now you're in the 3rd trimester, you may need an extra 200 calories a day, but that's not much. It's about the same as 2 slices of wholemeal toast with margarine. You just need to eat a healthy balanced diet, with a variety of different foods every day, including plenty of fruit and veg. Have a look at our guide to healthy eating in pregnancy . You may be able to get free milk, fruit and veg through the Healthy Start scheme . Emotional and mental wellbeing How are you today? If you're feeling anxious or low, talk to your doctor or midwife, who can point you in the right direction to get all the support that you need. You could also discuss your worries with your partner, friends and family. You may be worried about your relationship, or money, or having somewhere permanent to live. Don't keep it to yourself – it's important that you ask for help if you need it. Contraception Getting pregnant again is probably the last thing on your mind right now. However, now is a good time to start planning what type of contraception you would like to use after your baby is born. Getting pregnant again could happen sooner than you realise, and too short a gap between babies is known to cause problems. Talk to your GP or midwife to help you decide. Talk to your midwife about newborn screening You will be offered newborn screening tests for your baby soon after they are born. These screening tests are recommended by the NHS because they can make sure your baby is given appropriate treatment if needed. Your decisions about whether or not you want these screening tests will be respected, and healthcare professionals will support you. Ask your midwife or doctor for more information about newborn screening . This week's treat Spend some time in nature. Go and kick leaves in the park, walk in the woods, water your garden or plant some seeds (use gloves to avoid the risk of infection). This is good exercise and will encourage your brain to release feel-good chemicals. Baby basics From the essentials of caring for your baby to understanding their sleep, find out all the baby basics you need to know about your newborn. More in week-by-week Week 40 The wait is nearly over. Within days, you'll get to meet your baby. It's been quite a journey, but the real adventure starts when your little one is born. Week 41 Week 38 More in week-by-week guide to pregnancy Sign up for emails Our emails include NHS trusted advice and support, tailored to your stage of pregnancy or baby's age. Sign up for emails Is this page useful? Yes No Thank you for your feedback! Support links Accessibility statement Contact Cookies Privacy policy Site map Terms and conditions &copy; Crown copyright