17 weeks pregnant guide - Best Start in Life - NHS Skip to main content NHS Best Start in Life home NHS logo Search the NHS website Search NHS logo Pregnancy Baby Toddler Childcare and education support (external) Home Pregnancy Week-by-week guide to pregnancy Back to Week-by-week guide to pregnancy Week 13 Week 14 Week 15 Week 16 Week 17 Week 18 Week 19 Week 20 Week 21 Week 22 Week 23 Week 24 Week 25 Week 26 Week 27 Week 17 You might start to feel your baby move now. You will not be able to tell exactly what they're up to, but soon you could be feeling every kick, punch, hiccup and somersault. On this page What's happening in my body? Your baby's movements Stretch marks 2nd trimester pregnancy symptoms (at 17 weeks) What does my baby look like? Action stations More in week-by-week Sign up for emails What's happening in my body? Week by week, your baby's getting bigger, and so is your placenta, which is feeding your baby and also removing waste. By the end of your pregnancy the placenta will weigh around 500g, which is as heavy as a packet of pasta. Your waist will start to vanish as your womb moves up and out of your pelvis. This will make you look more obviously pregnant. Around 1 in 5 women feel stressed or anxious during their pregnancy, and hormones can make even small problems feel overwhelming. If you feel sad or worried, talk to your doctor or midwife – there's a big support network out there for you. Your baby's movements Many women spot the first signs of their baby moving between 18 and 24 weeks. Inside your tummy, you might feel: bubbling fluttering rolling You might find that your baby moves more: after meals when you listen to loud music when you rub your tummy and talk to your baby when you are relaxing Tommy's has information about baby movements in pregnancy . Stretch marks Depending on your skin colour, you might notice pink, red, purple or brown streaks over your stomach and breasts. They may also appear on your bottom and thighs. These are stretch marks and affect up to 8 in 10 women. They are usually caused by hormones and your skin stretching. They usually fade to silver and become much less noticeable after your baby is born. Read more about stretch marks on the NHS website . 2nd trimester pregnancy symptoms (at 17 weeks) You may be getting a few aches and pains as your bump gets bigger. Your symptoms should be manageable, but talk to your doctor or midwife if they're not. Your signs of pregnancy could include: tiredness and sleeping problems ( week 19 has information about feeling tired ) swollen and bleeding gums ( week 13 has information about gum health during pregnancy ) pains on the side of your belly, caused by your expanding womb (known as 'round ligament pains') headaches (read about headaches in pregnancy on NHS.uk ) nosebleeds bloating and constipation (read about bloating on week 10's page ) indigestion and heartburn ( week 25 talks about digestive problems ) sore breasts leg cramps feeling hot dizziness swollen hands and feet urine infections vaginal infections ( see week 15 for vaginal health ) darkened skin on your face or brown patches – this is known as chloasma or the "mask of pregnancy" greasier, spotty skin thicker and shinier hair You may also experience symptoms from earlier weeks, such as: morning sickness (read about dealing with morning sickness on week 6's page ) weird pregnancy cravings (read about pregnancy cravings on week 5's page ) a heightened sense of smell mood swings ( week 8's page has information on mood swings ) a white milky pregnancy discharge from your vagina and light spotting (seek medical advice for any bleeding) What does my baby look like? Your baby, or foetus, is around 12cm long, from head to bottom. That's roughly the size of a pomegranate. Your baby can: move their eyes, although they'll stay shut for now react to loud noises open and close their mouth Your baby's fingernails are starting to grow and will have their own unique fingerprints. Even identical twins have different fingerprints. Your baby is about the size of a pomegranate Action stations Have you decided where you'd like to give birth? Read more about choosing a hospital, midwife-led unit or home birth , and talk to your doctor or midwife about your local options. It's a big decision but you can always change your mind later. Think about telling your work You do not have to tell your employer for several more weeks, but as soon as you do, you will have maternity rights and can attend antenatal appointments during paid work time. You can also ask for a risk assessment of your work place to ensure that you're working in a safe environment. Start doing pelvic floor exercises It's a good time to tone up your pelvic floor muscles. Gentle exercises can help to prevent leakage when you laugh, sneeze or cough. Get the muscles going by pretending that you're having a pee and then stopping midflow. Visit Tommy's for more information on pelvic floor exercises. Antenatal classes Ask your midwife or doctor about online antenatal classes – they may be able to recommend one. The charity Tommy's has lots of useful information on antenatal classes and preparing you for birth . Even if you've had children before, antenatal classes are still worth going to as you can meet other parents-to-be. The NCT offers online antenatal classes with small groups of people that live locally to you. Smoking, drinking and caffeine in pregnancy Do your best to stop smoking and give up alcohol , and go easy on the tea, coffee and anything else with caffeine. Ask your midwife or GP for support. Vitamins in pregnancy To keep bones and muscles healthy, we need vitamin D. From late March/early April to the end of September, most people make enough vitamin D from sunlight on their skin. However, between October and early March, you should consider taking a daily vitamin D supplement because we cannot make enough from sunlight. Some people should take a vitamin D supplement all year round, find out if this applies to you on the NHS website. You just need 10 micrograms (it's the same for grown-ups and kids). Check if you're entitled to free vitamins . Exercising in pregnancy It's recommended that you do 150 minutes of exercise a week while pregnant . You could start off with just 10 minutes of daily exercise – perhaps take a brisk walk outside. Listen to your body and do what feels right for you. Healthy eating There's no need to eat for 2. You just need to eat a healthy balanced diet, with a variety of different foods every day, including plenty of fruit and veg. Have a look at our guide to healthy eating in pregnancy . You may be able to get free milk, fruit and veg through the Healthy Start scheme . More in week-by-week Week 18 You may feel your baby move for the first time around now. If you do, it may feel like a gentle fluttering sensation. Week 19 Week 16 More in week-by-week guide to pregnancy Sign up for emails Our emails include NHS trusted advice and support, tailored to your stage of pregnancy or baby's age. Sign up for emails Is this page useful? Yes No Thank you for your feedback! Support links Accessibility statement Contact Cookies Privacy policy Site map Terms and conditions &copy; Crown copyright